content/posts/2025-01-02-demo/index.md, before:

---
title: "Discover Roq, the Quarkus Way for Static Site Generation in Java"
description: >-
  Did you know about Roq? A powerful new tool that combines Java and Quarkus. Ok, prep a warm drink and put on some soft music and let's find out why Roq is so cool with the comfort of Quarkus Dev Mode and all its eco-system. Bonus: a touch of TailwindCss to make it look great!
tags: demo, code, java
toc: true
escape: true
---

![roq-advent.png](./roq-advent.png)

Just another Static Site Generator? Well, I am not so sure - Roq is just a layer on top of Quarkus leveraging its whole ecosystem.

I’ve spent time looking at other SSGs in the JavaScript ecosystem (Gatsby, Next.js, Nuxt) and in other languages (Hugo, Jekyll, JBake…). Roq borrows many of their popular features and conventions.
What really stands out, though, is that these SSGs have to re-implement most of the core building blocks inside their framework.
With Quarkus, we already get almost everything we need out of the box — and that’s a key distinction:
- Quarkus has Qute as Type-Safe template engine, some sugar for Roq.
- Roq Plugins and Themes are Quarkus extensions.
- Quarkus allow to serve files statically and dynamically.
- CDI allows to extend and bind data and templates together.
- Quarkus extensions can be used with Roq, the most use-full is the Quarkus Web-Bundler (to bundle script, styles and web deps without any config).
- Quarkus test framework.
- And Quarkus Dev Mode 🥰 !

Roq is a rock on top of Quarkus:
- Create endpoints for all your static site based on conventions (dir structure and Frontmatter data).
- Allow to define data files (yml or json) and consume them in templates.
- Provide plugins and themes.
- Add a command to export you Quarkus app as a static site.
- A GitHub Action for automation.
- Soon: A CMS to manage article and pages from the Quarkus Dev-UI.

In this demo, we will install Quarkus and clone a repository, change a few things to see how it reacts.


## Setup

Make sure you have the JDK 17+ on your machine and install the [Quarkus CLI](https://quarkus.io/guides/cli-tooling) using the command bellow:
```shell
curl -Ls https://sh.jbang.dev | bash -s - trust add https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/quarkus/quarkus-cli/
curl -Ls https://sh.jbang.dev | bash -s - app install --fresh --force quarkus@quarkusio
```

**NOTE:** We started working on a Quarkus Wrapper to allow starting dev-mode and soon also editor mode without anything to install on the machine.

**TIP:** You can optionally install [Quarkus IDE tooling](https://quarkus.io/guides/ide-tooling) to make the xp even smoother.

I cooked a [demo repo](https://github.com/ia3andy/the-code-site) with Quarkus, Roq and Tailwind extensions in the pom.xml:
```shell
# Clone the starter repo (or download):
git clone https://github.com/ia3andy/the-code-site.git
cd the-code-site
```

You should be all set for the whole journey 👌

What did I clone 🤨?
```
the-coder-site/
├── content/
│   ├── index.html                # Website index page and metadata
│   └── **                        # Articles and pages
├── public/images/                # Images for your site
├── web/
│   ├── *.js                      # Scripts (auto-bundled)
│   └── *.css                     # Styles (auto-bundled)
├── templates/
│   ├── layouts/
│   │   ├── default.html          # Base HTML structure
│   │   ├── post.html             # Layout for a blog post
│   │   └── page.html             # Layout for a page
│   └── partials/
│       ├── header.html           # Site header
│       └── footer.html           # Site footer
├── config/application.properties # Site config 
├── pom.xml                       # Quarkus setup (Roq, TailwindCSS)
└── ...                           # Gitignore, Maven Wrapper
```

Let's start Quarkus Dev-Mode:
```shell
quarkus dev
```

When Quarkus is started. yeah... well... after downloading a bunch of dependencies for Tailwind and all (just the first time), press `w` on you keyboard and let the magic happen!

I suggest you put your browser on your second screen if you have one, this content is also available in your new [blog](http://localhost:8080/posts/discover-roq-the-quarkus-way-for-static-site-generation-in-java/) (or in `content/posts/2025-01-02-demo.md`)

## 🚀 Episode 1 - The Index Page and Live-Reload

Let's open `content/index.html` and have a look.

The first part is the FrontMatter header, it allows to set up the site and provide data for the templates:
```yaml
---
layout: default
title: Your Name
description: >-
  Personal blog - A programmer sharing thoughts on software development,
  Java, and web technologies.
greeting: Hi, I'm Your Name!
tagline: Just a coder
navigation:
  - title: Blog
    url: /
  - title: Tags
    url: /tags
  - title: About
    url: /about
paginate: posts
---
```

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **Change the `title:` with your name**

👀 **›** _Switch to the browser and see the change, it should update in 1 or 2s._

**Note**: Styles and script changes are way faster to be loaded, I am currently working on making the page changes way faster too.

The `layout: default` is the template which will wrap this page content, they are defined in `template/layouts/` but we will see that later.

The content part is in html (because it a `.html` file), it is pretty straightforward. You can see how pagination on posts happens.

## 🏄 Episode 2 - Web-Bundling

The Quarkus Web Bundler, takes the `web/` dir stuff and use the [mvnpm](https://mvnpm.org/) dependencies, to create a production ready "bundle" for your page. `{#bundle /}` is included in the default layout and add the resulting script and style html tags.

Let's give it a ride:

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **In the `web/styles`, change the `@theme { ... }` part by this:**
```css
@theme {
    --font-sans: 'Atkinson Hyperlegible', system-ui, -apple-system, sans-serif;
    --color-primary: #7c2d12;
    --color-secondary: #9a3412;
    --color-tertiary: #ea580c;
    --color-surface: #fff7ed;
    --color-surface-2: #ffedd5;
    --color-surface-3: #fed7aa;
    --color-card: #ffffff;
    --color-card-border: #fdba74;
    --color-border: #fdba74;
    --color-border-strong: #fb923c;
    --color-code-bg: #fff7ed;
    --color-code-text: #c2410c;
    --color-pre-bg: #ffedd5;
    --color-pre-text: #7c2d12;
    --color-accent-300: #fdba74;
    --color-accent-400: #fb923c;
    --color-accent-500: #f97316;
    --color-accent-600: #ea580c;
    --color-accent-700: #c2410c;
}
```
👀 **›** _Slick right?_ (you also have a dark mode button in the site if you want to give it a shot)

**Note:** The design is using TailwindCSS which is supported by Roq and Quarkus using the `quarkus-web-bundler-tailwind-css` extension.

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **In `web/app.js`**, add this in the bottom:
```javascript
alert('Hello Roq');
```

👀 **›** _Check the browser_ (and then remove it 😅)

If you have a look to the pom.xml, you'll see mvnpm deps for `hightlightjs` and the font `Atkinson Hyperlegible` used in the css (dependabot will take a good care of them).


## ⚡️ Episode 3 - Writing Posts and Pages

To Create a new page:
- Create a new file in `content/` with `.md` or `.html` extension.
- Add it to the menu in the index page (it will be under `[filename]/` by default).
- 👀

To Create a new post:
- Create a new file in `content/posts` with `.md` or `.html` extension.
- 👀 It is already available in the blog!
- Add a `title`, `description`, some `tags` and why not a bit of content (the path is based on a `slug` of the title by default).

**TIP:** You can also create a directory with an `index` file instead if you want to access relative static files in your page or post.

Ok, let's have a bit of fun:

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **open `config.properties` and uncomment the line**
👀 **›** _I didn't know you could write articles that fast 🚀_

This is faker data generation to help you with pagination and tagging (it's only enabled in dev mode thanks to `%dev`).

## 🏌🏻‍♀️ Episode 4 - Data

We already covered a lot, let's quickly cover the rest.

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **Create `data/navigation.yml` with the `index.html` FrontMatter navigation content:**
```yaml
items:
  - title: Blog
    url: /
  - title: Tags
    url: /tags
  - title: About
    url: /about
```

🏻‍💻 **›** **In `templates/partials/header.html` change this:**

```
- {#for item in site.data.navigation}
+ {#for item in cdi:navigation.items}
```

👀 **›** _Congratulation, you didn't change a thing 😅_

**Tip** You can also [map this data to a structure](https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-roq/dev/quarkus-roq-data.html) (Java class or record) for type-safety and making sure your data is meeting expectations.

## 🥱 Episode 5 - Templates: Layouts, Partials, Tags and Extensions

This is a bit boring but important to know.

Layouts let you share and reuse parts of the HTML around your content — headers, footers, wrappers — so pages only provide the unique content while layouts handle the surrounding structure.

![roq-layouts.png](roq-layouts.png)

🏻‍💻 **›** **In `templates/layouts/default.html` replace the `{#insert /}` this in the `<main>` by this:**
```html
<h1 class="text-4xl font-bold tracking-tight sm:text-5xl">One template to rule them all 💍</h1>
```

👀 **›** _All pages in the site is now showing this message_

Partials (located in `templates/partials/`) let you reuse small HTML/Qute snippets—like a header, a footer, a card, a pagination block, or a meta block. Instead of repeating the same HTML everywhere, you include them with `{#include partials/… /}`, keeping layouts and pages clean and consistent.

Tags (located in `templates/tags/`) are small, self-contained components you can call from any template. They behave like mini-templates with parameters, useful for things like buttons, cards, or repeated UI fragments. You invoke them using Qute’s `{#your-tag foo="bar"}` syntax, and they keep your templates much cleaner by replacing boilerplate HTML with a reusable tag definition.

`@TemplateExtension` [methods](https://quarkus.io/guides/qute-reference#template_extension_methods) can be used to extend the data classes with new functionality from Java (to extend the set of accessible properties and methods). For example, it is possible to add computed properties and virtual methods.

## 🔥 Episode 6 - Themes

If you create a [Roq app](https://code.quarkus.io/?a=roq-with-blog&e=io.quarkiverse.roq%3Aquarkus-roq) using Code Quarkus, you’ll notice that you get a fully styled, well-structured website without writing any template or CSS yourself. That’s because Roq allow to use themes, which provide all the building blocks: layouts, components, styles, scripts, and templates.

[Roq themes](https://iamroq.com/docs/themes/) are deeply overridable, letting you replace or extend only what you need while keeping the rest intact. This keeps your project focused on the content, not the design system. Whenever you want to adjust a layout, change a component, or tweak the styling, you simply override that part in your project, and the rest of the theme continues to work seamlessly.

You can also create your own. The process is very similar to what we’ve seen in this demo: you define your layouts, templates, components, and styles, and Roq takes care of wiring everything together. This gives you full freedom to shape the look and feel of your site while still benefiting from Roq’s structure and conventions.


## Conclusion

I hope you enjoyed the demo and consider using Roq for your next site, if you want to give your support, a star on GitHub will show me:
<a class="github-button" href="https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-roq" data-color-scheme="no-preference: light; light: light; dark: dark;" data-icon="octicon-star" data-size="large" data-show-count="true" aria-label="Star quarkiverse/quarkus-roq on GitHub">Star</a>

The Roq [users](https://iamroq.com/roqers/) and [community](https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-roq?tab=readme-ov-file#contributors-) are growing, and I hope to see you there soon 🚀.

Plenty of new things are coming in the next few months — a CMS, i18n for collections, a dead-link checker, an mkdocs theme, and more.

If you spot issues, have ideas for cool features, or want to contribute, you’re more than welcome ❤️

Commit message:

Update Roq and Web Bundler

content/posts/2025-01-02-demo/index.md, after:

---
title: "Discover Roq, the Quarkus Way for Static Site Generation in Java"
description: >-
  Did you know about Roq? A powerful new tool that combines Java and Quarkus. Ok, prep a warm drink and put on some soft music and let's find out why Roq is so cool with the comfort of Quarkus Dev Mode and all its eco-system. Bonus: a touch of TailwindCss to make it look great!
tags: demo, code, java
toc: true
escape: true
---

![roq-advent.png](./roq-advent.png)

Just another Static Site Generator? Well, I am not so sure - Roq is just a layer on top of Quarkus leveraging its whole ecosystem.

I’ve spent time looking at other SSGs in the JavaScript ecosystem (Gatsby, Next.js, Nuxt) and in other languages (Hugo, Jekyll, JBake…). Roq borrows many of their popular features and conventions.
What really stands out, though, is that these SSGs have to re-implement most of the core building blocks inside their framework.
With Quarkus, we already get almost everything we need out of the box — and that’s a key distinction:
- Quarkus has Qute as Type-Safe template engine, some sugar for Roq.
- Roq Plugins and Themes are Quarkus extensions.
- Quarkus allow to serve files statically and dynamically.
- CDI allows to extend and bind data and templates together.
- Quarkus extensions can be used with Roq, the most use-full is the Quarkus Web-Bundler (to bundle script, styles and web deps without any config).
- Quarkus test framework.
- And Quarkus Dev Mode 🥰 !

Roq is a rock on top of Quarkus:
- Create endpoints for all your static site based on conventions (dir structure and Frontmatter data).
- Allow to define data files (yml or json) and consume them in templates.
- Provide plugins and themes.
- Add a command to export you Quarkus app as a static site.
- A GitHub Action for automation.
- Soon: A CMS to manage article and pages from the Quarkus Dev-UI.

In this demo, we will install Quarkus and clone a repository, change a few things to see how it reacts.


## Setup

Make sure you have the JDK 17+ on your machine and install the [Quarkus CLI](https://quarkus.io/guides/cli-tooling) using the command bellow:
```shell
curl -Ls https://sh.jbang.dev | bash -s - trust add https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/quarkus/quarkus-cli/
curl -Ls https://sh.jbang.dev | bash -s - app install --fresh --force quarkus@quarkusio
```

**NOTE:** We started working on a Quarkus Wrapper to allow starting dev-mode and soon also editor mode without anything to install on the machine.

**TIP:** You can optionally install [Quarkus IDE tooling](https://quarkus.io/guides/ide-tooling) to make the xp even smoother.

I cooked a [demo repo](https://github.com/ia3andy/the-code-site) with Quarkus, Roq and Tailwind extensions in the pom.xml:
```shell
# Clone the starter repo (or download):
git clone https://github.com/ia3andy/the-code-site.git
cd the-code-site
```

You should be all set for the whole journey 👌

What did I clone 🤨?
```
the-coder-site/
├── content/
│   ├── index.html                # Website index page and metadata
│   └── **                        # Articles and pages
├── public/images/                # Images for your site
├── web/
│   ├── *.js                      # Scripts (auto-bundled)
│   └── *.css                     # Styles (auto-bundled)
├── templates/
│   ├── layouts/
│   │   ├── default.html          # Base HTML structure
│   │   ├── post.html             # Layout for a blog post
│   │   └── page.html             # Layout for a page
│   └── partials/
│       ├── header.html           # Site header
│       └── footer.html           # Site footer
├── config/application.properties # Site config 
├── pom.xml                       # Quarkus setup (Roq, TailwindCSS)
└── ...                           # Gitignore, Maven Wrapper
```

Let's start Quarkus Dev-Mode:
```shell
quarkus dev
```

When Quarkus is started. yeah... well... after downloading a bunch of dependencies for Tailwind and all (just the first time), press `w` on you keyboard and let the magic happen!

I suggest you put your browser on your second screen if you have one, this content is also available in your new [blog](http://localhost:8080/posts/discover-roq-the-quarkus-way-for-static-site-generation-in-java/) (or in `content/posts/2025-01-02-demo.md`)

## 🚀 Episode 1 - The Index Page and Live-Reload

Let's open `content/index.html` and have a look.

The first part is the FrontMatter header, it allows to set up the site and provide data for the templates:
```yaml
---
layout: default
title: Your Name
description: >-
  Personal blog - A programmer sharing thoughts on software development,
  Java, and web technologies.
greeting: Hi, I'm Your Name!
tagline: Just a coder
navigation:
  - title: Blog
    url: /
  - title: Tags
    url: /tags
  - title: About
    url: /about
paginate: posts
---
```

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **Change the `title:` with your name**

👀 **›** _Switch to the browser and see the change, Live reload should be real quick._

**Note**: Styles and script changes are way faster to be loaded, I am currently working on making the page changes way faster too.

The `layout: default` is the template which will wrap this page content, they are defined in `template/layouts/` but we will see that later.

The content part is in html (because it a `.html` file), it is pretty straightforward. You can see how pagination on posts happens.

## 🏄 Episode 2 - Web-Bundling

The Quarkus Web Bundler, takes the `web/` dir stuff and use the [mvnpm](https://mvnpm.org/) dependencies, to create a production ready "bundle" for your page. `{#bundle /}` is included in the default layout and add the resulting script and style html tags.

Let's give it a ride:

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **In the `web/styles`, change the `@theme { ... }` part by this:**
```css
@theme {
    --font-sans: 'Atkinson Hyperlegible', system-ui, -apple-system, sans-serif;
    --color-primary: #7c2d12;
    --color-secondary: #9a3412;
    --color-tertiary: #ea580c;
    --color-surface: #fff7ed;
    --color-surface-2: #ffedd5;
    --color-surface-3: #fed7aa;
    --color-card: #ffffff;
    --color-card-border: #fdba74;
    --color-border: #fdba74;
    --color-border-strong: #fb923c;
    --color-code-bg: #fff7ed;
    --color-code-text: #c2410c;
    --color-pre-bg: #ffedd5;
    --color-pre-text: #7c2d12;
    --color-accent-300: #fdba74;
    --color-accent-400: #fb923c;
    --color-accent-500: #f97316;
    --color-accent-600: #ea580c;
    --color-accent-700: #c2410c;
}
```
👀 **›** _Slick right?_ (you also have a dark mode button in the site if you want to give it a shot)

**Note:** The design is using TailwindCSS which is supported by Roq and Quarkus using the `quarkus-web-bundler-tailwind-css` extension.

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **In `web/app.js`**, add this in the bottom:
```javascript
alert('Hello Roq');
```

👀 **›** _Check the browser_ (and then remove it 😅)

If you have a look to the pom.xml, you'll see mvnpm deps for `hightlightjs` and the font `Atkinson Hyperlegible` used in the css (dependabot will take a good care of them).


## ⚡️ Episode 3 - Writing Posts and Pages

To Create a new page:
- Create a new file in `content/` with `.md` or `.html` extension.
- Add it to the menu in the index page (it will be under `[filename]/` by default).
- 👀

To Create a new post:
- Create a new file in `content/posts` with `.md` or `.html` extension.
- 👀 It is already available in the blog!
- Add a `title`, `description`, some `tags` and why not a bit of content (the path is based on a `slug` of the title by default).

**TIP:** You can also create a directory with an `index` file instead if you want to access relative static files in your page or post.

Ok, let's have a bit of fun:

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **open `config.properties` and uncomment the line**
👀 **›** _I didn't know you could write articles that fast 🚀_

This is faker data generation to help you with pagination and tagging (it's only enabled in dev mode thanks to `%dev`).

## 🏌🏻‍♀️ Episode 4 - Data

We already covered a lot, let's quickly cover the rest.

👩🏻‍💻 **›** **Create `data/navigation.yml` with the `index.html` FrontMatter navigation content:**
```yaml
items:
  - title: Blog
    url: /
  - title: Tags
    url: /tags
  - title: About
    url: /about
```

🏻‍💻 **›** **In `templates/partials/header.html` change this:**

```
- {#for item in site.data.navigation}
+ {#for item in cdi:navigation.items}
```

👀 **›** _Congratulation, you didn't change a thing 😅_

**Tip** You can also [map this data to a structure](https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-roq/dev/quarkus-roq-data.html) (Java class or record) for type-safety and making sure your data is meeting expectations.

## 🥱 Episode 5 - Templates: Layouts, Partials, Tags and Extensions

This is a bit boring but important to know.

Layouts let you share and reuse parts of the HTML around your content — headers, footers, wrappers — so pages only provide the unique content while layouts handle the surrounding structure.

![roq-layouts.png](roq-layouts.png)

🏻‍💻 **›** **In `templates/layouts/default.html` replace the `{#insert /}` this in the `<main>` by this:**
```html
<h1 class="text-4xl font-bold tracking-tight sm:text-5xl">One template to rule them all 💍</h1>
```

👀 **›** _All pages in the site is now showing this message_

Partials (located in `templates/partials/`) let you reuse small HTML/Qute snippets—like a header, a footer, a card, a pagination block, or a meta block. Instead of repeating the same HTML everywhere, you include them with `{#include partials/… /}`, keeping layouts and pages clean and consistent.

Tags (located in `templates/tags/`) are small, self-contained components you can call from any template. They behave like mini-templates with parameters, useful for things like buttons, cards, or repeated UI fragments. You invoke them using Qute’s `{#your-tag foo="bar"}` syntax, and they keep your templates much cleaner by replacing boilerplate HTML with a reusable tag definition.

`@TemplateExtension` [methods](https://quarkus.io/guides/qute-reference#template_extension_methods) can be used to extend the data classes with new functionality from Java (to extend the set of accessible properties and methods). For example, it is possible to add computed properties and virtual methods.

## 🔥 Episode 6 - Themes

If you create a [Roq app](https://code.quarkus.io/?a=roq-with-blog&e=io.quarkiverse.roq%3Aquarkus-roq) using Code Quarkus, you’ll notice that you get a fully styled, well-structured website without writing any template or CSS yourself. That’s because Roq allow to use themes, which provide all the building blocks: layouts, components, styles, scripts, and templates.

[Roq themes](https://iamroq.com/docs/themes/) are deeply overridable, letting you replace or extend only what you need while keeping the rest intact. This keeps your project focused on the content, not the design system. Whenever you want to adjust a layout, change a component, or tweak the styling, you simply override that part in your project, and the rest of the theme continues to work seamlessly.

You can also create your own. The process is very similar to what we’ve seen in this demo: you define your layouts, templates, components, and styles, and Roq takes care of wiring everything together. This gives you full freedom to shape the look and feel of your site while still benefiting from Roq’s structure and conventions.


## Conclusion

I hope you enjoyed the demo and consider using Roq for your next site, if you want to give your support, a star on GitHub will show me:
<a class="github-button" href="https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-roq" data-color-scheme="no-preference: light; light: light; dark: dark;" data-icon="octicon-star" data-size="large" data-show-count="true" aria-label="Star quarkiverse/quarkus-roq on GitHub">Star</a>

The Roq [users](https://iamroq.com/roqers/) and [community](https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-roq?tab=readme-ov-file#contributors-) are growing, and I hope to see you there soon 🚀.

Plenty of new things are coming in the next few months — a CMS, i18n for collections, a dead-link checker, an mkdocs theme, and more.

If you spot issues, have ideas for cool features, or want to contribute, you’re more than welcome ❤️
